Background information on emails.  An email is just a plain text file,
consisting of a list of meta-information, the so called "header", together with
the actual message content, the "body".  The header consists of name-value
pairs called fields.  There are fields like "Date", which indicate when the
email was written.  The two most important fields are "To" and "From", which
specify the recipient and sender of a mail, respectively.  Most fields are set
by the mail program of the sender, some are added on transmission along the
way.  Nothing prevents some computer program from generating a correctly
formatted email with forged information in the header.  It is indeed common
practice, if you have several email addresses, to use the same server for
sending emails, but with different identities.  Radboud's CNCZ page explains
how to do that.

Now consider the following situation. There are two companies, Niftystuff and
GreatCoffee, both in the coffee trading business, with connections to
Argentina and Brazil.  They compete for an important contract with the dutch
finance authority to supply it for the next two years with coffee.  A steady
supply of coffee is important to ensure due processing of tax declarations, so
we're talking big amounts of high quality coffee here.  The taxpayer's money is
at stake!

Jan, the Boss of Niftystuff, is just about to sign a contract with Pieter, head
of the tax authority, in the next few days.  Niftystuff's coffee isn't as good
as the one from GreatCoffee, but Niftystuff's offer is a lot cheaper.  One day
before the contract is being signed, Kees, the Boss of GreatCoffee, sends an
email to Pieter claiming that due to recent political developments in Brazil,
which coincidentally is true and all over the news, Niftystuff's offer is now a
lot more expensive.  Kees' son in law, who studies at Radboud, explained to
Kees some weeks before how to configure the company's mail client to fake the
"From" header of email messages (Yes, you can do that with Outlook), so Kees
makes the email look like it is coming from Jan.  He knows how Jan's mails
usually look like, because they have had correspondence before.  The new, fake,
offer is still cheaper than the one from GreatCoffee, but taking into account
GreatCoffee's higher quality, Pieter, who has never heard of cryptography,
digital signatures and the like, unsuspectingly decides to sign the contract
with Kees.

This is without doubt a legal problem, because Kees only got the contract
through lying.  It is also a problem in cyberspace because it was carried out
by means of electronic correspondence.

There are two legal domains into which this case fits: private law and criminal
law.  Private law because it concerns making a contract so it has to be
investigated whether the contract came to be by valid means.  The case also
fits in criminal law, because impersonating someone else to gain an unfair
advantage is criminalized.

The legal sources which apply here are the Burgerlijk Wetboek and the Wetboek
van Strafrecht.

Let's first look at the part that concerns the contract.  Article 6:228 BWB
"Fundamental mistake" says:

  "1. An agreement which has been entered into under the influence of a mistake
  with regard to the facts or legal rights and which would not have been
  concluded by the mistaken party if he would have had a correct view of the
  situation, is voidable:"

  "a. if the mistake is caused by information given by the opposite party,
  unless this party could assume that the agreement would be concluded even
  without this information"

The conditions for paragraph 1.a are fulfilled, because firstly, Pieter signed
the contract under the mistaken belief that Jan's offer was too expensive.
Secondly, Pieter would not have signed the contract if he have had the correct
information about Jan's offer. And thirdly, the other party, in this case Kees,
gave false information to Pieter, and Kees was very well aware that Pieter
would not have signed the contract otherwise.

The legal implication therefore is that the contract is voidable.  According to
Article 3:50 "Extrajudicial nullification", this gives Pieter the right to
nullify the contract, in which case it is as if the contract never existed.
Pieter would be free from the obligation to pay for the coffee, and Kees would
not be obliged to deliver coffee.

Independent from the civil aspect of the case, there also is a criminal aspect.
Sr 362 says:

  "Hij die, met het oogmerk om zich of een ander wederrechtelijk te
  bevoordelen, hetzij door het aannemen van een valse naam of van een valse
  hoedanigheid, hetzij door listige kunstgrepen, hetzij door een samenweefsel
  van verdichtsels, iemand beweegt tot de afgifte van enig goed, tot het
  verlenen van een dienst, tot het ter beschikking stellen van gegevens, tot
  het aangaan van een schuld of tot het teniet doen van een inschuld, wordt,
  als schuldig aan oplichting, gestraft met gevangenisstraf van ten hoogste
  vier jaren of geldboete van de vijfde categorie."

The conditions for this clause are fulfilled, because Kees has assumed a false
identity in order to persuade Pieter to take up a debt.  The debt here is the
obligation to pay for the coffee, Pieter is the debtor in this respect.  Kees
therefore has committed fraud, and is subject to the punishment of inprisonment
up to four years or a fine of the fifth category, which according to Sr 23
paragraph 4 is EUR 19.500,-.

According to dutch law, only public prosecution can initiate criminal
investigations, but both Pieter and Jan could ask for criminal investigation.
In regard to Article 3:50 cilil law on the other hand, Jan can derive no legal
rights to influence the state of the contract.
